And. Beautiful transcript right excellent. Off we go. So, The more that we work on this manuscript, the more it's clear that is the opportunity for a huge revolution in scholarly publishing.
And the publication of knowledge. At 2 and 4 and from the world. And that the current system is not fit for purpose.
Now, I'm going to imagine what Ranganison would have done today where he faced with these problems.
His. Journey was to journey. Physically from India, to UK, from mathematics to library science, to learn from it and to bring that back to India and to reform the whole world of librarianship.
And I think we are in a position a hundred years on from his birth. To do something similar here.
I've been reading a lot about. Tipping points, butterfly effects and things like this.
There's a fine quote from Margaret Mead which I will find Margaret, we, Margaret Mead was, And anthropologist of great.
Right. Great effect and, respect. Now.
Here is her quote. It's not absolutely clear that She said this. But, this is one of my, mantras here.
Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world. Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has.
And that is us. A small group of thoughtful, committed citizens. And the need and the opportunity to change the world.
So, let's take that as one of the many, that we have to inspire us to inspire us when at times get hard when there's too much work when we are tired and when we doubt what we are doing never doubt that what we are doing is massive.
And import. Okay. And I am seeing that more. Every day that we do this i see more and more what we have to offer to the world right so I've put down some of the things that, and, would, have.
And in my view, Ranganson, 2,000, and 24, would have done.
So he visited a different culture to learn from them and to bring back experience and then to refine and enhance it.
We don't need to physically travel anywhere. But I think that Rankanison would have visited 2.
Different communities of practice and learned massively from them and brought them back to scholarship. So one of them is free and open source software.
Appreciate it to F slash OS. And, this encompasses both.
The open source software movement. And the free software movement. Which have the same ideals. But differ somewhat in the dissemination and the principle behind it.
And the second that he would have visited is Wikimedia. So I like to think of Ran Gannison as spending a considerable time developing.
Foss software. And also a considerable time working with Wikimedia to develop semantic resources in that.
For the benefit of the world. And, If we can encapsulate that in what we're saying and if we can make it available to the world, it's just possible that we can change the world.
The world needs a tipping point in Scholarly knowledge. And in knowledge for the planet, and it's not getting it.
And what I want to try and do is to run through some of the things that Ranganathan would have looked like.
Now, fundamentally to this is values. Unless we know what our values are, then what we're doing is mechanistic and are a crashing.
We have to know. Why we are doing this and to be able to go back to those values on a daily basis and help those values to refine what we're doing.
And I would have said that the values. That knowledge is a public good. That is, I'm not necessarily going to rewrite the, laws, but the 1st law books offer use I would turn into a we, I'll try and use the word we.
We should turn into. No is a public good. And unless you, take that as fundamental.
Then you are not able to build consistent systems. As soon as you do that, This is consistent. A corollary of that in the modern world is that this knowledge implies equity.
In other words, everyone in the system whether contributing or reading or using or both. Or.
Is has the same rights. And shares the same values. In that and it has no boundaries in terms of countries or languages or philosophy or practice.
And the surge, which, It's very, very important is that we do not wait for other people to build the systems to make this happen.
We build the systems ourselves. And that is why we are building tools and harshal. I am so excited to see what you have done with us, because this comes straight into our tradition of building tools.
And I'm going to Contrast the. 2 areas of, open of FOSS software, for and open software on the one hand and quotes.
Open access publishing on the other. Okay. And, Why one has succeeded and why the other has not succeeded.
So. Brando open source software has
Has been around for about 25 years. If we go back to the Open source.
And correct me when I say open source and unless it is related to this the open source institute. Was founded in somewhere history.
It's true. So. The late 19 nineties.
And open source as a term. Was, in 1998. Now the.
If you like the sister organization. Although they don't share a common governance but if you like the sibling it grew up with, is, 3 software.
And they will find it in the free software foundation. And let's see if we can find some.
History here.
Yes.
In 1983, so actually 15 years before open source, Richard Solomon posted the initial announcement of GANU.
And whenever I say, I have to. Find the GANU. Wesagon.
No It's very important, the GNU!
It was, no it was here yesterday.
Anyway.
Yes, yes, I showed it to you. So.
Anyway,
So let's just see, right.
Public declaration that this should be free. The new manifesto. So, Richard Stallman developed.
A number of tools and then really that he had to that these tools embodied a philosophy.
And I think I will go straight to Wikipedia and find the 4, 4 freedoms.
Right, so
Users have freedom in using studying sharing and modifying software. it relates to freedom and that is the key word that we have to think about.
Freedom. In other words, how do we make knowledge free? he used the term free as in And Was it free as in freedom not as in beer?
Try and find that one.
Thank you. The canoe has been having a sleep. Yeah. So the canoe will come out quite frankly.
Okay. This group. This canoe is very practice because it was given to me by Richard Stallman himself.
I know. We won't go into that.
Right. Free as in speech. Not as in beer.
Well I'm not sure where it is but anyway here are the essential freedoms. The freedom to run the program as you wish for any purpose.
I'm now the computer scientists like him always come from 0. The freedom to study how it works change it so it does your computing as you wish.
Access to source code is a precondition. The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help others.
And the freedom to distribute. Copies of your modified versions. Now. I am inspired by this vision and this is these freedoms also apply to open source as well.
So in free and open source FOSS. These freedoms apply. And so I've been inspired by Boss.
Because not only have they adhered to these values, they have built a mechanism for ensuring that these values are continue to be associated with anything which is labeled, FOSS software.
And, and, they have built an organization or 2 organizations the free software foundation at which monitors free software and the
Open Source Institute, which monitors and controls open source. And they will decide from very clear. Definitions, whether your software is free and or open or whether it is closed.
So in other words, if you say this software is free, but it may not be used, to create nuclear weapons that is not re software.
If you say this is pre open software, but it may not be used by this group of people that is not briefed off, that is not open source software and so on.
It is by anybody for any purpose. And you may feel that is too free, but, 1st of all, and It works.
It's implementable. Conditions on top of that are unimplementable in general. Secondly, it's brave and by being brave, it's actually succeeded.
It says you can do anything you like with this software. And, We are not going to.
We're not going to, stop you doing it. And so on.
The. Whereas when it comes to Okay. No.
So that's free and open software. The other thing that, Ranganison would have visited and worked very much with would be Wikimedia.
Wikimedia, Wikipedia was founded as a free,
And psychopedia. And about 2,003.
Let's see what it is.
I often find it's actually easier to go to Wikipedia itself to find out.
Oh, what something is then to go to the homepage, but.
Hey, you are Wikipedia talking about. Wikipedia. Hang on. That's not what I want.
Right, here you are. So free.
2,001, right. And since 2,003, it's got its own.
Foundation. Right. So, That's more recent than open source.
And free software, software. But, I think that Wikipedia has massively, been influenced by, And in particular, the use of tools and the use of bus.
Now, we've seen the principles of. For software. Let us see what the principles of open access are.
And we go to the Budapest, Open Access Initiative. And read it.
And it's about 2 pages.
One of the people on it, Lester Chan, has been invited to contribute to this.
Series of papers. Right, I'm not going to read all of it.
But it's written in wonderful language and you should definitely read it. An old tradition and a new technology have converged to make possible an unprecedented Public good.
So that's the key thing about open access. It is a public good.
Then this sentence here. When removing barriers to the literature will accelerate research in rich education.
Share the learning of the rich with the poor. And the poor with the rich. And that's a really critical addition.
Make it as useful as it can be and lay the foundation or uniting humanity in a common conversation and quest for knowledge.
No, I think most of that was written by Peter Suber who's 1 of the, leading lights, in open access.
And these are wonderful. Aspirations. And then there's a call on people.
To do it. The literature is that which scholars give to the world without expectation of payment.
I take some I, you know, I don't completely agree with this. Because this is the idea that scholars are giving knowledge to the world.
Depends what you mean by scholars but this has been interpreted as people who are employed in universities and research organizations.
And that is one of the major feelings in my view of open access. But, here's a definition and this is really important By open access to this literature, we mean it's free availability on the public internet, ing any users to read, download, copy, distribute, print search or link to the full text of these articles.
Call them for indexing, pass them as data to software or use them for any other lawful purpose without financial, legal or technical barriers other than those inseparable from gaining access to the internet itself.
And that again should be one of our leading philosophies in this. I'm sure that Had an working in 2,002, he would have.
Espouse this as well.
Then they put forward some strategies. Now, where they have failed and I think open access has seriously failed.
Is that, they did not put in, actionable definitions of what open access means.
And this has meant that the term is useless as a definition. Whether something is open access or not.
So for example, The transcript of this. Session is that open access? Well, You don't know.
If we, by definition, you know, by legal definition, it's not.
It belongs to me because I'm creating it. And if you make a contribution that belongs to you.
That's copyright. But, unless you define these things, you cannot use a term.
Effectively and that's been a major for, failing of, open access.
I am sure that Rank Anderson would have been active. In this, movement.
I'm going to Try and list some of the aspects where I can press. On the one hand.
Software and Wikimedia. Together and on the other hand, with the current state of publication.
So, the 1st thing is our values listed. And by the way, What I, so this is an interjection.
These transcripts have been very useful. At the moment they are flat monologue.
What I would like to do is to experiment with putting. Sections into them. So I'm going to use the word section as, and subsection and see if we can pick those up.
In the transcript because then We have a structuring as we go through this. If it doesn't work, we're going to put it in manually.
So let's start again. Section. Comparing Wikimedia and software practice. With publication practice.
Subsection. Not values. We can media and software state.
Their freedoms, in terms of principles. And licenses. So the license is chosen by Wikimedia and software are those which permit use.
Reuse. Modification. Redistribution. And those correspond to the, open knowledge is open.
Dev. Free to use free to reuse which means modifying and free to redistribute.
And I'm sure, an Ganison would have. Espoused those.
Much publication. I would say the majority of scholarly publications do not honor this.
I see this as a table. So I'm going to say table.
Values? Wikimedia. Software or freedoms and CCB CC by license or CC by SA license publication.
Messy. Is it equitable? Now, equity, equity means that everybody feels that the system is just.
And they are justly treated by the system. And that in general is true for both Wikimedia and for software.
There are growing pains so Wikimedia has been Anglo-centric and northern centric in its inception, but there are major and often male centered.
There are major initiatives to change this. Software, is equitable, in that there are no barriers to, creating or using software.
Other than those of, obtaining the tools, to do it, which may involve, and some cost.
Bye, contrast, Modern scholarly publishing is criminally inequitable. The monopoly of the neo colonialist mega mega surveillance publishers is totally inequitable and causes massive damage to the world.
Is it?
I can't read what I've written. Anyway,
Okay, I'll come on to that in a minute. Is it transformative? So.
Fox and Wikimedia have both been incredibly transformative. They have changed the way the world works.
You've seen 500,000. . Programs in Hi, and you can probably take that up to several 1 million with the other repositories.
In Wikimedia it's probably it's among the top 10 sites used in the world for any purpose and it's available almost to everybody.
I did talk to somebody yesterday who was collaborating with Eiopian, now with Ericrean.
Librarians and they don't have access to the internet. I think we have to work on the basis that the internet is the basis of everything we do.
And it may be problematic at the moment. But it's essential to what we do just as paper was essential to the printing press.
Open access publishing has not been transformative. It's made no change to our understanding of knowledge as a public good and in many cases it's actually taken us backwards.
Then we have, public value against private glory. There's a Tremendous article about 10 years ago by Michael Borani.
In the Guardian about how the publishing industry and Robert Maxwell in particular has used the vanity of academics to create a system which where the main product is glory for the.
Researcher or the organization that's implies them. In software, there is no glory. Glory is not something which is built into the system.
It emerges. So we respect people who publish. Free and open software But, and as an example, Pi Pi gives stars and our an ice garg.
One of our authors has got many stars on hi, Pi, because people like Pai get papers.
It's not built into the system, you don't expect it, but it's very nice when it happens.
This is what's called a gift economy. In other words, you are valued by how much you give to the communal good.
Just does not occur, in anything other than a minute amount in And. Knowledge publication.
Then the values have been translated into enforceable practice. And this is done by, licenses and monitoring.
So, boss software monitors. What it. What people do and there's a strict borderline.
Yes, no, as to whether software is Horse compliant. It's not maybe or under these conditions.
It's either compliant or it's not compliant. Open access is totally, failed on this.
So you have created, a mishmash of, quotes. Open access unquote which anybody can use for anything they like and nobody challenges.
I mean, I've done some challenging. Oh, I'm dictating this on time.
And there have been virtually no challenges so open is not an actionable in. Publication whereas it is in software.
Then we have, the costs. The transformation in software have meant that the costs of the costs of creation have compound to near 0.
There are costs, but they are born by people. Who, are either funded to do this or actually, see this as a valuable part of their business.
So I do not have to pay for, we do not have to pay for tools to create software, to edit it, to publish it.
To version it, to validate it, to reuse it, to create libraries. And so on all of these tools are free.
And they are created by the community. And the community values at people who Create tools in this ecosystem, including our own tools.
In, open access, there are, there is very little value of, And, free and most publication costs vastly more than it should.
The price, the price is much higher than the actual cost. Beyond brand who's written an article for us, estimates that the total cost of publishing a scholarly article is about $500.
There are publishers who make 40% profits by charging. 10 times or more than that.
As part of the. Next section. I'm not doing well on these sections.
The next section is annotation. So sorry, it's not, it's automation.
The section automation. Open, free and open source software. And Wikimedia have developed automatic tools.
For making it easier to carry out routine operations. So it is easy. 2 upload software to repositories, easy to validate software.
It's easier to easy to use software libraries. It's easy to discover software. It's easy to
Yeah. Whereas in, Noledge publication, it is not easy to publish knowledge.
There are no or there are very few automatic tools. Other than, tools that come out of the software movement and out of movements such as Wikimedia and Mozilla.
But the actual publication of scholarly knowledge is restricted by mega corporations and they have contributed nothing to the automation.
Then we have validation. Now, Again, the, boss Wikimedia, communities have put a lot of effort into validation.
Is a piece of. Hey, component of the system valid? Does it do what it says? Is it consistent with the values and the principles?
Does it work? And there are You know, thousands or more of tools which validate what is created and allow you to assert that it works.
And to do that, you have to define what the object is. So you have to have a schema for the object, and validate the object against that schema.
Where you have licenses or rather distribution principles this is validatable by choosing licenses so by default what we do is Apache 2 for the software and CC by for the for our
Discourse, although we might choose that, change that to CC 0. as we feel, it depends what we publish.
But those licenses are clear and actionable and that actually actionable in court. So that the major court systems of the world understand these licenses.
And if you break them, you can be sued, and have to pay, reparation to the creator of the material.
Similarly, We can validate that a document or piece of software conforms. And that is done by schema validation by, by Okay.
Testing. By various types of automated testing so that every time we create a piece of knowledge we can validate whether it conforms to various things.
By contrast, publication validates metadata. And authors, journals and so on.
But it does not validate content. So there is no agreement as to what the content of a scholarly article is.
We cannot rely on having an introduction as opposed to a background or methods as opposed to protocol and so on.
It makes it almost impossible to have automatic reuse without a lot of empirical tools.
Then, Next section. Organization. The.
Voss has developed 2 bodies, the Free Software Foundation and the Open Source Institute. We can, has its own system of governance.
Mozilla has its own system of governance. Mozilla has its own system of governance.
And they are transparent. And, heavily used.
We have then we have clarity and transparency. Is it clear what's happening? And again, it's a fundamental principle of boss wiki that it should be clear and transparent.
We know what's going on. And it is organized to make it easy for us to understand what's going on in Scully knowledge, there is no, clarity or transparency for most of the publication.
Especially by mega surveillance publishers.
Right, so now.
I think. No, I think I've dealt with much of that. And I'm now going to come on to section.
How do we change this?
There are 2 strategies. One is to reform what we have already got. And the second is to build something new.
And better. The,
So this is a consistent theme in innovation, over several 1,000 years. So we have talked about the printing press.
The printing press was doing something different and better. The, development of, Well, I won't go through examples.
We have that opportunity. Scholarly publication has chosen reform. In other words, they say we have a system where we pay commercial public to publish.
And we want to reform this system incrementally or the benefit of the world. And that has completely failed.
And it's getting worse. So I would say that publication over the last 20 years has actually got technically worse and contains less content.
Less types of content than when it started. Whereas, software and, Weiki has been continually improving.
What it does it's building something different and it's building better So our goal in this.
Article is to highlight how we build something which is radically different and radically better. Than anything.
That is in practice at the moment. Like many things, The.
Creating something new and radical. is beset with uncertainties and usually fails.
I don't use the word failure. I, use the word experiment. Which, may not have worked out at the time.
We are confident that we will work out that this is a beacon of hope. Which will show where the future is.
And how others can join us. And build it into something that grows. Exponentially and rapidly.
So. To do this, We have to do most of the work ourselves. We have to build a prototype which is clearly working.
And clearly valuable. We are not going to change the world by specifications of saying this is what we would like to see the system.
As. Many people have done that in terms of knowledge. Production, and it has not worked.
They may be guidelines for other people, but the things that have worked are things which actually allow as many people as possible to be involved.
And Ranganison, I'm sure, would have been at the center of this. He talks about a whole category of people, you know, the illiterate, the mentally infirm, and so forth and so on.
We. Saying that this belongs to everyone. And it belongs to the farmers in the fields. Aged population, teenagers to those who are suffering in justice, all sorts of things.
And he would have had a list there of the people that we must reach out to and include in this.
So,
I'll go then, is build something better. How am I doing? 53.
I think. I think I'm beginning to. Run out of things to say what we're going to do in the next session is we're going to look at actually making the manuscript.
It's easy to create yet more things which should be in the manuscript. This in the PDF manuscript will probably be about I Half a page at most, something like that.
We have so much to say, but we will refer to this. Presentation and to the recording of it.
So Question before we close the transcript. Questions, comments?
So these are all about the open sign open source.
This is about this is about we may come up with phrases, but it's about equitable knowledge for everyone.
Right? Some sort of phrase like that. It takes time to find the right phrases. I've had one or 2 that, work quite well in the past.
Okay. Hmm.
What we haven't actually done in this list is to Also, indicate that not doing this as
Has measurable costs on you know on the planet and it's inhabitants right So one of the phrases I came up with.
Some years ago was Closed access means people die. Now, It will be incredibly valuable if we could come up with some measure as to how many people died.
Hmm.
Through as a lack of Universal equitable access to knowledge. It, it requires research, I think.
To give to give an example. It's been estimated that every about somewhere between one and 4,000 tons of carbon
Kills a purse.
Right. So that is type of measure which strikes home to people. Every time you publish knowledge behind pay walls, knowledge which could enhance human life or save us from problems every time you do that.
Ultimately, are you are killing a portion of a person?
And, You know, we don't have time to research that for this paper, but that's I think is one of the key things that should be researched.
Hmm.
How does lack of knowledge kill people?
Okay, so but we are giving the disadvantage of the closed knowledge.
Yes, we're. How much we can do in this paper, I don't know.
I think we have some information for the paper now. It's the structuring. Yes. Yes.
We've got more than enough information. We've got to, we got to manage it. I was actually going to in the next bit start off with you know, how we create this paper, right?
So I'm going to start a little bit with that. And I'm also then going to look at what, has done and other people who've looked at summarizing and, cataloging this.
So how we create the paper will actually be a good introduction to that. So, we go through, the routine of Placing the transcript of.
Hmm.